Container Menus (#518)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/blocks/container-menus.md

Reviewer: `block-containers` should link to it, maybe in a heading at the end

---
title: Container Menus
description: A guide explaining how to create a simple menu for a container block.

> authors:

Reviewer: This article does not come from the wiki, right?

Author: No, not directly. I used it partly to grasp the topic, so some similarities may show up.

---
title: Container Menus
description: A guide explaining how to create a simple menu for a container block.
authors:
  - Tenneb22
---

<!---->

::: info PREREQUISITES

You should first read [Block Containers](./block-containers) to familiarize yourself with creating a container block entity.

:::

When opening a container, like a chest, mainly two things are needed to display the contents of it:

- a `Screen` which handles rendering the contents and background onto the display.
- a `Menu` that handles shift-clicking logic and syncing between the server and client.

In this guide, we will create a dirt chest with a 3x3 container that can be accessed by right-clicking and opening a screen.

## Creating the Block {#creating-the-block}

> First, we want to create a block and block entity corresponding to the [Block Containers](./block-containers#creating-the-block) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we want to create a block and block entity; read more in the [Block Containers](./block-containers#creating-the-block) guide.
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::block](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/DirtChestBlock.java)

@[code transcludeWith=:::be](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/entity/custom/DirtChestBlockEntity.java)

> ::: info Note

Reviewer: tip or info. I don't think we ever used note.

As we want a 3x3 container, we need to set the size of items to 9.

:::

### Opening the Menu {#opening-the-screen}

> We somehow want to open the menu later, so we will handle that within the `useWithoutItem` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to be able to open the menu somehow, so we will handle that within the `useWithoutItem` method:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::use](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/DirtChestBlock.java)

### Implementing MenuProvider {#implementing-menuprovider}

> To add the menu functionality, we now need to implement `MenuProvider` in the block entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add the menu functionality, we now need to implement `MenuProvider` in the block entity:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::menu](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/entity/custom/DirtChestBlockEntity.java)

The `getDisplayName` method returns the name of the block, which will be displayed at the top of the screen.

`createMenu` wants us to return a menu, but we haven't created one for our block yet, so let's do that.

## Creating the Menu {#creating-the-menu}

> We'll create a new class called `DirtChestMenu` which extends `AbstractContainerMenu`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating the Menu {#creating-the-menu}

`createMenu` wants us to return a menu, but we haven't created one for our block yet. To do this, we'll create a `DirtChestMenu` class which extends `AbstractContainerMenu`:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::menu](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/menu/custom/DirtChestMenu.java)

The client-side constructor gets called on the client when the server wants it to open a menu. It creates an empty container which then gets automatically synced with the actual container on the server.

The server-side constructor is called on the server, and because it knows the contents of the container, it can directly pass it as an argument.

> Then we need to register the menu in a new `ModMenuType` class as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we need to register the menu in a new `ModMenuType` class:
```

> `quickMoveStack` handles shift-clicking items within the menu and replicates the behavior of regular ones like from chests and dispensers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`quickMoveStack` handles shift-clicking items within the menu. This example replicates the behavior of vanilla menus like chests and dispensers.
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::registerMenu](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/menu/ModMenuType.java)

> We can now set the return value of `createMenu` in the block entity to use our menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now set the return value of `createMenu` in the block entity to use our menu:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::providerImplemented](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/entity/custom/DirtChestBlockEntity.java)

::: info

> The `createMenu` method gets called only on the server, so we call the server-side constructor and pass `this` (the block entity) in as the container parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `createMenu` method only gets called on the server, so we call the server-side constructor and pass in `this` (the block entity) as the container parameter.
```

:::

## Creating the Screen {#creating-the-screen}

> To actually display the contents of the container on the client, we also need to create a Screen for our menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To actually display the contents of the container on the client, we also need to create a screen for our menu.
```

> We'll make a new class which extends `AbstractContainerScreen`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll make a new class which extends `AbstractContainerScreen`:
```

@[code transcludeWith=:::screen](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/rendering/screens/inventory/DirtChestScreen.java)

> For this screen, we just use the default Dispenser screen texture as the background, because our dirt chest uses the same slot layout. You can also optionally use your own texture for `CONTAINER_TEXTURE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this screen's background, we're just using the default Dispenser screen texture, because our dirt chest uses the same slot layout. You could alternatively provide your own texture for `CONTAINER_TEXTURE`.
```

> Because this is a screen for a menu, we also need to register it on the client with the `MenuScreens#register()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because this is a screen for a menu, we also need to register it on the client with the `MenuScreens#register()` method:
```
